# PREFACE

This course book was first published by Alpha/HTB in 2004 - and Sandy Millar, then the vicar there, wrote a very kind foreword. But that is some 21 years ago and the world and the Church in this country have both moved on a long way since then. This is an updated edition, whilst the last edition in 2008 was no more than a reprint.

Many hundreds of people have done this course over the years, and a few of their reactions follow on the next page. I believe it continues to be a useful resource for home groups and whole Churches – especially those who have been involved, or want to be involved, in ministries with the poor in their local area. As I say in the foreword, we developed these materials to accompany one particular ministry – The Besom (now, www.thebesomnetwork.org) which I founded in 1987 after returning from working with Jackie Pullinger in Hong Kong, and which still flourishes in other hands.

Many of us feel inadequate or fearful and do not know how to start helping others in need. The Besom seeks to assist those who want to to get out into their local community in a variety of very practical, down-to-earth ways, painting or decorating the flats of those who are compelled to live in degrading housing, helping with the gardening of those too old to do it for themselves, supplying good quality furniture for mums being rehoused out of refuges and many more. We found that many of those returning from such projects came back not just very moved and with tales of lives transformed by their simple acts of kindness but wanting to think through what they had seen at a deeper level.

The faith of the Christ follower is incomplete unless we seek to follow John’s command in 1 John 2: 6: ‘Whoever claims to live in Him, must live as Jesus did’. And Jesus, of course, spent most of His time here on earth amongst the poor and the needy. So, working with the poor is not just for the select few but for all of us, however old, whatever our background and whether we have a lot or a little that we can give in terms of time, money, skills or things.

Since starting The Besom, my wife and I have spent much of our time encouraging others towards the poor. We were involved for some 16 years, as you will read in this book, in seeking to help mainly single mums and widows in the African- and Caribbean-heritage communities in South London to start up microbusinesses and to stand on their own feet, with all the dignity and self-confidence that that brings. We also established a training farm for new entrants in Somerset that concentrated on small business start up in traditional farming activities – see https://faithinthesoil.co.uk. In all that we have sought to do, we have tried to set up communities of believers who can help each other and then go out to help others. All have focussed on how we are best to live in a world that is so unequal and where so many do little more than survive at best.

As ever, if there are mistakes of any sort in this book, they are mine. This edition was brilliantly updated for republication by Sarah Lamour, save for the chapter on Caring for God's World which was brought up to date by the ever-inspiring Will and Pip Campbell-Clause. Clara Wells assisted greatly in the formatting. My  many thanks to all four.

James Odgers Summer 2025
