# FOREWORD - Summer 2004

I saw the first, faint outline of the notice some time ago. It was clearly there – some way along the narrow road that leads to life – so it was unavoidable. It was just this side of a gateway leading on to the next part of my journey on that road. In some ways, even though I have a strong and passionate faith in Jesus, it could not have been a more unwelcome notice coming from my background in the UK: white, middle-class, male, public school, Oxford, City lawyer, banker and now, farmer. I walked towards it reluctantly.

The writing on the notice was clear too. It said that as I passed through the gateway, I would begin to hear, as never before, the cries of the poorest and the most excluded on this planet – cries for food, cries for mercy, cries for rest, cries for justice, cries for love. My love.

I have passed through the gateway now and stand the far side of it. For the time being, at least, I find that I cannot close my ears to those cries. They are not deafening so much as urgent, heart-rending and desperate. And my heart is full of questions about the character of the God of love and justice, whom we worship, and about what it means to love Him. And to love our neighbour as we love ourselves.

God seems to be talking today to many people around the world who have passed through this gateway so I thought I would put some materials together to describe the lie of the land as I perceive it stretching out in front of me, in case this might help others. And it is all ahead: I have scarcely begun to work out how to set about what comes next. Please do not think otherwise. Of one thing I am sure: if the body of Christ in this country is ever to see our God heal this land of ours, this is a gateway through which he will be calling many more in the days to come.

The road ahead begins with this question: how can I live as I do when those who send up these agonised cries to an all-loving God live as they do?

My journey up to now has been a testimony to the extraordinary perseverance and love shown to me by God and by other people. God’s love for you and me is a fiercely jealous one and he will pursue us relentlessly until we turn and requite it. Those He sent to tell me of that love faced what must have seemed an insurmountable task. At every step I would run off, at every mention of the Gospel I would smile knowingly and explain why it was not for me. And yet it was, of course – as it is for all of us.

After a forensic – and rather arrogant – examination of the evidence over several years (I was a rookie lawyer then, after all!) I discovered to my surprise and discomfort that the Gospel record was a true one. This affected my life, however, not one jot because an intellectual faith is no faith at all. In Hong Kong I met several of those who had been healed immediately and painlessly of long-term heroin addiction in the ministry of Jackie Pullinger-To and I realised for the first time that if Jesus was alive today he would naturally be working in the same ways and in the same places as He did when he was here incarnate. The transformed lives of those men were a sufficient proof of that rather obvious fact. And it was then that my heart began to break for the poor and the marginalised. Jackie’s description of poverty, by the way, is useful: ‘Broadly speaking, we will interpret the poor as those who for some time are unable to free themselves from poverty and who need help.’

Yet I still continued along a path I chose rather than His path for me. Two years later He showed me how determined He is to ensure that we go His way and not ours. That unequal battle took me spiralling down to a very dark place from which I could not go on in my own strength. And I surrendered, at last, and then He began to show me some of the astonishing things He had prepared for me. At His behest, I left the law to go to work with Jackie and returned to found a sort of bank with three others in the City of London (that He blessed outrageously) and to start The Besom ( I left the bank after seven years to establish FACE to Face, a ministry that encourages self-employment among the poor in our churches.

‘One goes more quickly to heaven from a hut than from a palace.’ St Francis of Assisi

‘One goes more quickly to heaven from a hut than from a palace.’ St Francis of Assisi‘One goes more quickly to heaven from a hut than from a palace.’ St Francis of Assisi

Besom is a response to the chasm that yawns ever wider between those of us who have, and can give, and those in need. It provides a tiny and rickety bridge to help us to cross that chasm and it challenges us as we go.

Often at The Besom, people come back from the other side of the divide not just excited about the transformation in the lives of those they have assisted but also with questions about their response to what they have seen, often for the first time: people living in circumstances of extreme degradation; people so lonely they are on the verge of suicide; people hungry for food and for love. Their love. And the questions inexorably lead on to other questions – not about the people on the receiving end but about us, those of us who have and can give. Poverty is not primarily about the poor but about those of us who have the means to alleviate it. Exclusion is not about the excluded but about we who do the excluding. Marginalisation is not about the marginalised but about we who do the marginalising. Love – the sort of love that God the Father showed when he sent his Son to die for you and for me, that sort of love – is said by St Paul to have been poured into our hearts by his Spirit. Yet if it has been, as St John wrote, then we are bound to assist all those in need that we come across and whose needs we can diminish or assuage. If we do not, he asks, ‘how can the love of God be in’ us? How indeed!

John Stott, in New Issues Facing Christians Today, writes that ‘simple living is not incompatible with [the] careful enjoyment’ of whatever we have been given, or have earned with the gifts and talents God has given us [1]. I agree up to a point (for Jesus came that we might have life in all its fullness) but that enjoyment – in the sense of using for our own pleasure – will inevitably be subordinate to the demands of love and these are never ‘careful’ in the worldly sense of prudent but instead often require the imprudent use – even the seeming waste – of time and resources, the going of extra miles and the incurring of cost or even sacrifice. So, love will reduce what there is to ‘enjoy’ and thus will lead us to a much more simple but rich lifestyle - one that would reflect more obviously a deep compassion for those in need. That way, and only that way, lies integrity. These materials are designed to assist us to discover a response to the love he showed us; a response to the cries of those in need; a response to that inevitable question ‘How can I ..., when they...?’.

What follows has only come about thanks to two extraordinary people. The first is Perry-May Ward. She travelled with me and my family in 1998 and 1999 during our research into different ways in which people sought to alleviate poverty in the most degrading and hopeless parts of the world. She began assembling these materials on our return, before she moved to work on a very difficult council housing estate in the UK. Ruth Valerio took over the task in Spring 2000 having left her then role as Head of Social Responsibility at the Evangelical Alliance. Perry-May and Ruth seem to me to have rushed through the gateway long since with a joy and determination that show a level of faith and trust that I can only long for.

It is really Perry-May and Ruth who, between them, have written and sorted the materials which follow and turned them into ten moderately bite-sized chunks. Frankly, they have done far more, far more effectively, than I. Everything that is good and right is down to them. The mistakes, omissions, non sequiturs and tendentious comments, of which there are many, are mine.

I would add my thanks to the team at Holy Trinity Brompton. They have been unswervingly generous over the years as Besom and FACE to Face have got up and running and have ever been a source of love and good advice. They are an amazing crowd and if you have yet to go on an Alpha course, despite all they have done to encourage you to do so, may I recommend that you hasten to the nearest one. I am also grateful to Miles and Deborah Protter, whose excited response to, and detailed comments on, the first draft of the materials encouraged me to persevere. My thanks too to Toria Gray, Julia Evans and Sarah Bibby at Holy Trinity Brompton, who have taken on the task of getting the materials from a recalcitrant Besom computer to the point of publication, and to all of those, too numerous to mention by name, who tested the materials and fed back their comments.

‘We must be the change we wish to see in the world.’ Gandhi

‘We must be the change we wish to see in the world.’ Gandhi‘We must be the change we wish to see in the world.’ Gandhi

Four final points: first, I have not attempted to address specifically two fundamental issues both of which are keys to an understanding of the great divisions in our nation – those of taste and class. This is not because they are unimportant but rather that I believe they will inexorably surface in most sessions. Secondly, I apologise for any material that has been taken from another source but has been inadequately acknowledged. This has not been done intentionally, and I am very happy to acknowledge any such plagiarism in a later edition. Thirdly, I hope that these materials are seen as the tools they are intended to be, no more and no less; we are all in process, all being transformed into His likeness. But the journey takes a lifetime. And, as I said at the outset, I am probably no further along the road than you. Lastly, discussion about living more simply has attracted others from different faiths (and none) for years. The body of Christ is late into the field or peaked too early – perhaps in the thirteenth century! Some of the examples and quotations which follow might smack of the New Age, or of sandals and Woodstock, or of a ‘back to the earth’ movement, but they are nonetheless valid for all that if they provoke. The difference, very often, is that the New Age seeks the divine within, whereas we worship and follow the model of a God Incarnate.

James Odgers

Founder The Besom Summer 2004

‘What is my new desert? The name of it is compassion. There is no wilderness so terrible, so beautiful, so arid and so fruitful as the wilderness of compassion. It is the only desert that shall truly flourish like the lily. It shall become a pool, it shall bud forth and blossom and rejoice with joy. It is in the desert of compassion that the thirsty land turns into springs of water, that the poor possess all things.’ Thomas Merton
